it's a US ceasefire plan that has
stirred heated debate in Israel Benjamin
Netanyahu is warned by his allies that
their Coalition will collapse if he
accepts it Hamas said it's positive but
work still needs to be done so could
President Joe Biden's proposal end the
war on Gaza this is Inside Story
hello and welcome to the program I'm
Sarah vaner another proposal to end the
war in Gaza US President Joe Biden has
announced a three-phase plan he says
paves the way for a ceasefire in the
strip but the challenge now is how to
get both Israel and Hamas to accept it
the White House argues that if the group
accepts this deal then Israel will too
but as soon as it was announced prime
minister Benjamin Netanyahu allies
threatened to quit his government if he
treated it positively and Netanyahu
himself has reiterated what he's been
saying since October 7th that Hamas must
be destroyed and the Israeli captives in
Gaza returned so does Biden's deal stand
any chance of success we'll talk to our
guests in a moment first though this
report by IPM
genud it's time for this war to end a
firm declaration from US President Joe
Biden putting forward what he says is an
Israeli proposal to end the war the
three-phase plan includes the withdrawal
of troops from populated areas of Gaza
the release of Israeli captives in
exchange for hundreds of Palestinian
prisoners and deliveries of a into the
strip on the streets of Tel Aviv
protesters calling for the return of 125
Israelis still held in Gaza had a clear
message for their
government I'm here to support my
government in taking this deal the deal
that Netanyahu suggested our prime
minister that we'll get all our people
back home Hamas officials have signaled
they're viewing the proposal favorably
but not so Israeli
leaders Benjamin Netanyahu called it a
non-starter saying Hamas needed to be
eliminated before the war can end farite
ministers have repeatedly refused any
ceasefire and threaten to quit his
coalition government something the Prime
Minister wants to avoid
but Washington says hamas's military
capabilities have been reduced enough to
avoid a new October 7th scenario and the
moment has come for a six- week pause in
the fighting followed by negotiations
and the Reconstruction of the strip
Israeli soldiers have destroyed 50,000
homes in gaza's north and left its
largest refugee camp in
Ruins during the first Israeli incursion
my shop was was destroyed and we managed
to reopen it after some repairs now
after the second incursion as you can
see there's nothing left even if they
demolish the shop once more I'll stand
firm and won't
leave the US says if Hamas takes the
deal Israel will too a similar plan was
accepted by the Palestinian group last
month but rejected at the last minute by
Israeli leaders between delays and
contradictory statements more work is
likely to be needed before any ceasefire
can be agreed until then Palestinians
can only hope that if that happens
there'll be enough left in Gaza to
salvage iptm genford Al jazer for Inside
Story all right let's bring in all our
guests in Tel Aviv Alon leel is a former
Israeli foreign Ministry spokesman and
Ambassador in Montreal muen Rani is a
non-resident fellow at the center for
conflict and Humanity in studies mu is
also co-editor of the online magazine
Jalia in Washington DC Akbar Shahed
Ahmed is the senior diplomatic
correspondent for huff post welcome to
Inside Story to all of you I want to
start with a very quick uh um uh
temperature take on on this following
question and I'm hoping for now just for
a yes maybe or no answer do you think
the moment that we're in now is
ultimately going to lead to a ceasefire
Alon
will not end the war
M probably not
abar maybe and probably no okay so that
was useful so not a great deal of
optimism as as far as this ceasefire
plan is concerned let's get into the
details of it Akbar what was the play
for Biden on Friday he delivers this
surprise speech I think it was a
surprise for many he presents what he
says is in his plan but since then we've
understood there's some daylight between
but he's the one who's presenting it
which first of all is a little strange
and secondly we've understood there's
daylight between him and the Israelis on
it what was the play for the US
president so important to remember for
the Biden Administration we're still
working on persuasion right they're not
thinking about American leverage over
Israel in terms of military military
diplomatic support other forms of
support that the US provides that make
the Israel offensive possible right so
Biden is not saying as he did a few
weeks ago I'm withholding bombs unless
you do this what he's done with this
with this as you're saying in this play
is rely on the Biden administration's
preferred Battlefield which is a
battlefield of narratives right so they
want to say look at us we are reasonable
and in fact we are still with Israel
we're telling you this is the isra
proposal obviously that's very hard to
do when you haven't cleared that with
the Israeli side first but that the hope
for the V Administration was by saying
where with Israel we are aligned on this
the ball is in hamas's court they're
creating an Avenue in their view for
Israel to come to what they see as The
Logical conclusion here right which is
ending the fighting for now allowing in
humanitarian Aid easing the crisis all
of that to say so I mean if it's not
backed up with a real push from the US
side it's really hard to see if that's
anything more than spin right or drama I
was talking earlier today to a state
department official quite well informed
who was saying look Netanyahu has
already told us this isn't going to
matter unless there are consequences so
now for a lot of people in Washington
including people in the administration
who were involved in creating this right
uh there's not a huge amount of optimism
and in a way we're waiting for the next
shoe to drop so the first shoe was the
president announcing this sudden speech
and now it is Will Biden create any
consequences for n me
Alon as we mentioned in the intro you
headed Israel's foreign Ministry
previously how do you read this moment
the US president saying here's a deal
and by the way it's Israel's deal yet
he's the one presenting it and Israel
doesn't completely agree with it it
seems yeah the mere fact that Biden had
to expose the deal and not Israel is H
saying that uh he was very worried that
uh Nan will chicken out he put him in
front of a a certain mirror and said
this is what your cabinet approved now
go ahead and netan is already partially
denying it which was
expected H Biden tried to go directly to
the Israeli public above the head of
Netanyahu and tell this is what your
prime minister
agreed I think it's the best plan you
can get and I agree with it go ahead put
the necessary pressure in a way is also
telling the world H go ahead and put
pressure on the sides to move on I
personally think that the big mistake
the big American mistake here is that
simultaneously without netan confirming
public
the plan he was invited to address the
Congress
for who is it's his fourth invitation
it's a world record Churchill is the
second one with three invitations to
address the Congress It's a Wonderful
excuse to postpone things and say I will
explain to the American people and to
the Congress what I'm about to do mine
uh so Alan mentioned something that
Netanyahu has been invited to speak
before a joint session of the US
Congress and he wasn't invited just by
one Congressional leader or just by the
Republicans no he was invited by the
senior all the senior Congressional
leaders Senate House of Representatives
Republican and Democrats even by the way
for our viewers who know this in some
detail this story even by Chuck Schumer
the Senate leader right who has been
extremely critical of Netanyahu and
called for election so they all called
for Netanyahu to come um how do you read
that how does that uh play how does that
factor into
this well based on what what Mr leel
just said I think it's clear that if
Biden thinks he can go over netanyahu's
head and appeal directly to Israeli
public opinion it's in fact Netanyahu
who can go over Biden's head and appeal
directly to us political Elites and and
US voters I I think the background here
is is quite strange as the other two
speakers have indicated it was a US
president who publicly presented what he
claimed is an Israeli offer or something
Israel has already agreed to then the
Israeli Prime Minister suggests actually
what Biden presented is somewhat
different than what Israel had agreed to
then a senior Us official says in fact
um the Israelis uh proposed uh
formulated this proposal but did so in
confidence and asked us not to make it
um public which Biden of course did
putting the ball squarely in the
Palestinians court and now you have very
senior Israeli government Minister
saying they know nothing about it and
that if Israel agrees to it um they're
going to collapse the Coalition who's
lying probably all of them um and um
this is It's just uh too much it's too
much for words and I think failure is
being set up to once again um place the
blame on the Palestinians and the second
point I would make is is that um Biden
has repeatedly engaged in such Maneuvers
where he's seeking to exercise pressure
on the Israeli leadership but the moment
the Israelis uh refuse to bend to such
uh pressure or push back um us pressure
collapses and it ends up being pressure
on the Americans rather than on the
Israelis to that point Akbar you're in
Washington DC you're talking to your
sources in and around the administration
in the political orbit right of the
Biden administration were were three
days removed from the speech how do they
feel about their move three days on do
they think Master move we've kind of
pressured you know the Israelis they're
going to have to do something or do they
think uhoh we might find ourselves with
egg on our faces I I would add again
I think there's still a degree of
confidence it's not a high level of
confidence but there is a degree of
confidence they can get somewhere um I
think Mo's point was in STO one about
American political Elite opinion right
one thing that this Administration has
been afraid of since October 7th given
the historical scale of the attacks and
and the trauma that not just isres felt
but many many people in this country
with ties to Israel Jewish Americans and
others the Administration has been
extremely anoid about looking
insufficiently close to Israel and they
that may sound to people who are saying
look 36,000 Palestinians dead the war is
nowhere near over famine is underway
have you really not been close enough to
the Israelis for the Biden team that's
still a dominating team right so that's
still very much going to be part of
their calculus as Netanyahu comes to
Congress on the flip side this was also
a political speech that they devised not
just with an eye to gaza's suffering and
an eye to Israel's security but with an
eye the November presidential election
right and so they're thinking from a
master stroke perspective maybe we can
make all sides happy right now the
Israeli side isn't happy you've also
seen Arab and Muslim Americans who have
been really critical of Biden come out
and say precisely what a little bit of
what n is saying you're putting the ball
on the Palestinians are going to blame
them and also saying how is this where
we are this many months into the war and
with Biden's own sort of seed limit on
Rafa being crossed right as these as all
these talks have been happening let's
just zoom out and remember there have
still been Israel strikes with Gaza
right there's still on a went now close
to a month of no Aid being allowed in
medical or food or any of that and so I
don't see who the administration is
making happy but they are a group that
sees themselves PA for a second on on
this issue I want to pick you up on a
point you just made that the US administ
the Biden Administration is quote
paranoid that they might appear
insufficiently close to Israel that's
what you said so we I I want to make
sure our viewers understand this the
Biden Administration for as much as
they've tried to Plate the um Pro
Palestinian demonstrators on campuses
they've tried to show since the
beginning of the war that they care
about Palestinian suffering and they've
come out often often belatedly but they'
they've come out with statements in
support of Palestinians Etc you're
saying that the bottomline political
calculus for them is they need to be
close enough to Israel
I think there's there's two aspects to
that right one is that fundamentally the
political Elite in this country across
both bodies is overwhelmingly pro Israel
right they may not be Pro Netanyahu but
they believe in the US Israel Alliance
it's a long-standing relationship and
that includes people in Democratic party
right so when you had leader Schumer
come out and say I don't want that n
yahu the subtext to all that is not
maybe we should read I'm in this
relationship the subtext is I don't like
dealing with this guy on the other end
of the phone get me someone else on end
of the phone and then there is a
question of Jonas there's a question of
how is this going to affect Biden's
re-elections so when Biden for instance
held up bombs for Israel in May you saw
Heim Saban a major Democratic party
donor directly reach out to some of
Biden's top political advisers and say
why is the president doing this this is
a billionaire right who's given tons of
money to Democrats and he he felt not
just comfortable reaching out to the
president's to political advisers he
then leaked that to s reporters so
there's huge political pressure
continuing yes there's some more more
concessions to prop Palestinian side but
the Instinct particularly for an old
school politician like Biden is am I
doing enough to make the pro Israel side
happy okay so Alan let's so that was the
US political calculus let's talk about
netanyahu's political calculus and
whether it has changed in the last three
days one thing is not a surprise at all
is that the farri right his far-right
ministers have said we don't want this
deal because what they don't want to end
the war right they want to keep fighting
against Hamas that's not a surprise we
know that they haven't changed their
view however y Leed head of the
opposition has said to Netanyahu if you
lose the far right by accepting this
deal if you lose their support you've
got our support we'll have your back and
you'll keep some form of Coalition in
Parliament and therefore you'll keep
your job do you think Netanyahu would do
that look what Biden's
speech did it sharpened the division
inside the Israeli public between the
right and the center left and the as you
said No Surprises with the right also no
surprises with the center left that is
allhe heartedly welcoming this plan what
it also did in addition to sharpening
the division here it put netan exactly
in the middle in a position that he can
choose he personally can choose any time
if he wants to go with the right or with
the center he has the two options so
it's it's up to him completely if the
two rightwing ministers will leave one
of them by the way said today that netan
is not showing him the plan he didn't
see anything in writing so netan is kind
of hiding it but if they decide to leave
he will immediately get the support of
the becking but this will mean that he
breaks his historic alliance with the
extreme right and the religious parties
and uh it might be the end of his
political career so he he can
choose and I think this is the reason
that he will try to delay and until he
comes to the
Congress formulate his view to the
American people and and explain exactly
what he's doing I'm almost sure that as
in the past he will have a standing oion
will come back as the hero and still do
nothing well still now he would be you
think he would be welcomed as a hero by
a joint session of the US Congress even
under the present circumstances
a reminder this this he's been invited
it's between now and the next eight
weeks I Believe by then by then arrest
warrants may have been issued against
him by the international uh criminal
court for crimes against humanity we
don't know but that seems very possible
at this
point look we
have has so much experience in
Congressional speeches and un speeches
he is a profession
he arranges pre-
arranges this the support inside the
Congress the pla inside the Congress and
he is a fantastic speaker and again he
will come back to Israel supported by
the Congress also here it will be about
four months before the American
elections all all the considerations in
American politics ICS are the elections
and they probably do not want to show
that if he dropping him and dropping the
Jewish State and dropping the friendship
with Israel so I think if he will not
make up his mind until the trip to the
United States if the Americans will not
force him to make up his mind before the
trip after the trip it will be easier
for him to just forget about this plan M
we started this conversation
about uh the driving question was
whether this moment might compel both
sides Israel and Hamas to accept a deal
we've been talking a lot about Netanyahu
I have a better understanding of the
political calculus on the US side the
Israeli side no one has said so far yes
Netanyahu is now under the gun to accept
this deal do you do you agree with that
there's no particular pressure on him
that there was no already to accept the
deal I I think that's a fair
characterization
as as you've seen um Netanyahu has come
out with public statements about a deal
that he um appears to be the one who
formulated it saying that yes we will
agree to a temporary ceasefire um during
which we um engage in a exchange of uh
captives and then six weeks later our
genocidal assault on the Gaza Strip will
resume and will continue until um uh
Hamas is destroyed look um I do believe
that um both the US Administration and
the Israeli government are operating on
the basis of um uh narrow partisan
political calculations but I also think
it's much more than that even if there
were no us elections this year um Biden
and his most senior officials have had a
lifelong passionate attachment to Israel
for throughout their political iCal
career they have seen Palestinians as
less than human and essentially as
irrelevant and Expendable human scum so
they really have no problem with what
Israel is doing to the Palestinians in
the Gaza Strip in terms of reducing also
the entire territory to Rubble as far as
Netanyahu is concerned yes of course he
would like to remain in power um in
order to avoid the consequences of the
various um legal cases that have been
directed against him but it also goes
far beyond that um October 7th was for
the Israeli political and security
leadership a failure of historic
proportions and the primary reason
they're continuing to prosecute this war
is so that they can make some kind of
strategic achievement so that when they
have to take
responsibility um for their failures
afterwards they can claim that they
compensated for October 7th by for
example eliminating the Hamas leadership
expelling the population to Sinai
destroying hamas's military capabilities
and so on and what I think the US is
doing now is basically telling the
Israelis you have failed for eight
months you're not going to succeed in
the next eight months and it's really
time to put an end to this before the
entire region blows up um uh but again
um when
advice and persuasion is not backed up
with pressure and leverage it's just
empty
words Alana I have a a wide question for
you A big picture question for you on
Israel's strategic Vision because I
haven't heard a strategic Vision being
articulated whether it's by Galant
whether it's by Netanyahu none of the
leaders have said this is what we want
for I you know it it's inv to say the
day after but even before this war there
didn't appear to be a strategic Vision
by Israel on how do we live with
Palestinians right if you take Gaza West
Bank and Israel they're about 7.3
Israelis 7.3 Palestinians so there's an
acute question of how do we live
together or side by side what's the
arrangement and Israel has done uh
annexation settlement occupation
blockade and regular Wars with
Gaza you were someone who you were
director general of the foreign Ministry
how is that question sort of tackled
within the The Diplomatic
Community look historically until 10
years ago there was an Israeli vision of
two states 10 years ago this Vision was
shoved aside and the government
repeatedly said no two states no
Palestinian State and was a TR trying to
lead to an annexation of of Zone C in
the West Bank so the policy before the
7th of October was very clear no
Palestinian State the the issue of a
Palestinian state had a comeback because
of the war an international comeback and
now what netan is saying look why should
I speak on long term we are in a in the
middle of a horrible war in which we
lost already,
1600 uh people ER let me finish this war
let me eliminate Hamas and we'll speak
on the day
after after I see Hamas eliminated so at
this point I agree with you at this
point Israel doesn't have a long term
Israel has a wish to eliminate Hamas and
to maybe decide on the future
afterwards abbar and I think this is
probably going to be the final question
do you get a sense what is your sense of
the Biden administration's next move
they have they have laid out a plan they
are daring both sides to accept it what
next well I just want to quickly pick up
on something alanso because I thought it
was quite important that the
Israelis have very clearly even pre
October 7th moved away from a two-state
solution framework and for the Biden
Administration and the US that's been
the Touchstone right that's been the
cover for decades of allowing and
supporting occupation and and
devastating you know Israeli campaigns
and alleged war crimes has been well one
day we're going to got to two State
prior to October 7th the Biden
Administration essentially was saying
we're okay not even ever talking about
that again right so this is now back to
the four I think that that gets to this
question of what's the next move for
them because they have not shown an
interest in a long-term solution and
settlement for Israelis and Palestinians
that's never been their priority some of
them you know pointed out have had a
long-term kind of opposition to
Palestinians um I think they don't know
where to go next I think they're really
really hoping that the mediators uh the
Egyptians and the CES can play a big
role here important to remember that
Egypt has said our peace treaty with
Israel might be at risk that's something
Israel might care about and might shape
the calculus but I don't think you've
seen the bid Administration reach a
decision on we'll pull this back and
because the military operations are
ongoing and they're not stopping the
military support they're in a corner of
their own making right they don't really
know how to get out and so their reflex
is unquestioned largely Full Tilt
support for Israel the more Israel can
say we're being persecuted ICC warrants
you're pushing our Center Corner the
Biden Administration will say oh my gosh
but sorry we have to show you even more
support despite everything we've seen
over all these months okay thank you
that's all the time we have for today's
discussion but I want to thank all our
guests Alon leel mu Rabani Akbar Shahed
Ahmed thank you too for watching the
program you can see it again anytime by
visiting our website alo.com and for
further discussion go to our Facebook
page that's facebook.com/ AJ insidestory
and you can also join the conversation
on X our handle there is AJ insidestory
from me Ser van and the whole team here
in Doha bye for now
[Music]